hardcore porn both of the straight and
gay varieties
entered mainstream american culture in
the 1970s
as the sexual revolutions swept away
many of the cultural and moral
inhibitions that had been keeping the
country's proverbial knees together
surprisingly the first porn movie ever
to be previewed by variety the leading
trade journal in the entertainment
industry
was boys in the sand from 1971 a
sexually explicit gay movie shot on fire
island with a budget of only four
thousand dollars
moviegoers celebrities and critics
flocked
to see it within a year deep throat a
straight porno opened to rave reviews
and a huge box office
exceeding that of many mainstream
hollywood films though we can't know
exactly how much it made
because it was financed by the mafia
within two years we saw the devil and
miss jones and behind the green door hit
theaters
these four movies made more money per
screen than even the godfather
which was released around the same time
though the sexual revolution that made
these films possible was at first
a mostly heterosexual affair it also had
a profound effect on gay men
the intense stigma attached to
homosexuality before stonewall
blocked any open discussion of gay male
sexuality
and force gay men's sexual expression
deep underground
consequently the increasing acceptance
of pornography during the 60s and 70s
played a significant role in the sexual
lives of gay men
even more than it did among the straight
men of the same age
the increasing social acceptance of porn
helped to legitimize visual
representations of homoerotic images
and gay sex in general before 1962
homosexual materials even those without
any sexual content
were considered obscene by definition in
the us and much of europe
the emergence of gay hardcore films
provided explicit representations of
gay's sexual behavior
not otherwise available and the
availability of such images helped to
affirm the nascent gay identity
since most gay men become adults without
learning the social and sexual codes of
their community
porn contributes as film critic richard
dreyer has observed
to their education of desire erections
orgasms and the performances of sexually
desirable masculine
and energetic performers helped to
create positive images of what gay men
could be
instead of the holy negative images
portrayed in mainstream culture
gay porn produced soon after stonewall
focused heavily on masculine men
since the culturally accepted image of a
gay man was that of the [ __ ] from
hollywood movies the artwork of toko
vago laxonen
better known as tama finland helped to
create the image of the hyper-masculine
gay man
that permeated gay culture in the 1970s
and gay porn movies sought to emulate
these ideals with the men they cast
while it's by no means representative of
the entire gay community
these masculine stars showed gay men
both young and
old that they could be more than just
hairdressers not that there's anything
wrong with that
if this pandemic has taught us anything
it's that we really ought to be
appreciating our hairdressers a lot more
but these porn stars were plumbers
carpenters cops firefighters bikers and
construction workers
the type of men that gay men desired to
be and desired to have
desire psychologists have found is not
something given to
us out of the blue it is constructed
through fantasy
and it is through fantasy that we learn
how to desire
pornographic movies are passports to a
fantasy world where sex exists without
the everyday encumbrances of social
convention
endurance or availability to imagine a
sexual performance in a fantasy or to
see one in a porn movie
enables us to experience sexual
excitements without the side effects of
anxiety
guilt boredom or danger
and for many of us the erotic excitement
is heightened when the fantasy includes
an element of risk
sex in public sex with a stranger sex
without a condom
or sex in front of a salad
lets us explore these fantasies
but porn didn't suddenly pop up in the
1970s fully formed and hard as a rock
porn even gay porn has been around for a
very long time
now i'm not going to get into cave
paintings egyptian carvings or
renaissance art though
this is a youtube video not a 10-part
netflix documentary though netflix if
you're watching call me
so let's start at the very beginning of
modern gay porn
i hear it's a very good place to start
[Music]
it's the 1950s and you're walking down a
busy new york street
you stop at a news stand and hidden
amongst the news cooking and culture
magazines
sits one or two issues of a physique
magazine
you buy it the clerk stuffs it into a
nondescript brown paper bag
and you rush home it started as an
underground phenomenon with small
magazines containing photographs of
almost nude men being sold by mail and
on newsstands in larger cities
these physique magazines and the
mail-order business that grew up around
them
were the primary source of erotic male
images for gay men
receiving the iconic nickname beefcake
bob mizer an amateur photographer living
in los angeles played a major role in
developing the business of publishing
homoerotic images
at the time in post-world war ii america
most photographs of nude men or drawings
of erotic scenes
were available only through private
networks to select mail-order customers
long aware of his attraction to men
miser had taken nude photographs of
attractive male friends since he was a
teenager
and developed the film in a closet set
up as a dark room a few years later when
mizer was experimenting with grouping
photos together
it occurred to him to create a magazine
he decided to call it physique pictorial
it featured photographs of young men
wearing only posing straps
bathing suits or loincloths and almost
no editorial content as fvhooven points
out in beefcake his history of the
physique magazine
the magazines were not merely one aspect
of a wider gay male culture
they virtually were gay culture
one writer estimated that the total
circulation of the beefcake magazines in
those oppressive times was over 750
000 probably the largest audience of
american gay male readers and consumers
assembled to that point
the cult of male beauty that the
physique magazines fostered helped to
shape gay men's physical ideals
before there was any common culture a
minuscule magazine featuring a bunch of
guys with their clothes off but not
completely naked may not seem like much
of a revolution in the history of sex
argues hooven
but to the men who bought them they were
something new and daring
it took courage to purchase one of those
little magazines in 1955
by 1958 mizer decided to branch out and
began to shoot short eight millimeter
black and white films of the same young
men he was photographing
they would be nude or dressed in greek
tunics lounging by the pool or wrestling
in oil
made in his home studio now a
fortress-like compound of seven
buildings protected by razor wire
fencing and several attack dogs
i'm not kidding the films employed
simple storylines in which the youthful
performers usually played stock
characters
much like in the magazines the softcore
shorts were
gobbled up by his magazine's reader base
with the sale of home projectors going
up by 40 percent in the la area
with the release of the first film by
the mid-1960s bob miser had photographed
more than 5 000 male models
many of them street kids hustlers
bodybuilders actors soldiers and sailors
one young man who showed up on miser's
doorstep in 1965 was joe d'alessandro
a young runaway from new york only 16
years old when he first showed
up joe had hitchhiked to california
after escaping from a juvenile home
he had since been supporting himself by
hustling and washing dishes in a pizza
parlor
one of his regular johns had recommended
he get in touch with mizer
he lied when they met and said he was
19. although mizer only shot one film of
d'alessandro
it was enough to grab the attention of
andy warhol who snatched up the young
looker and started putting him in his
own films in new york
his timing couldn't have been better
because there was a major crackdown on
erotic material in california
soon after d'alessandro modeled for
miser
virtually every physique studio in the
state was facing legal prosecution
for obscenity and prostitution charges
prostitution and nude modeling for
artists and photographers have a long
shared history
miser regularly recommended models to
other photographers and to
collectors even though he must have
realized that the young men were
probably being hired for sex but since
he had never directly benefited from the
exchange of sex for money from any of
his referrals
he did not consider himself vulnerable
at the same time over the years he had
developed an elaborate set of codes to
summarize information about each of his
models
temperament honesty and physical traits
as well as sexual characteristics and
interests
he offered the key to the code to
various trusted customers
nevertheless the secret code seemed
suspicious to the lapd vice squad
who arrested him for running a
prostitution ring he was convicted
and by the time he returned to his
studio the world of gay male pornography
had dramatically changed
[Music]
for years gay men in la had lived lives
of secrecy and fear
the lapd had systematically harassed and
trapped arrested and brutally beaten the
city's gay lesbian and transgender
population
on new year's eve 1966 for example
patrons of the black cat on sunset
boulevard
many dressed in drag were attacked by
undercover and plainclothed vice cops
after a number of people exchanged
customary kisses at midnight
more than a dozen were arrested and
forced to lie face down on the sidewalk
until squad cars arrived to take them
away
officers chased one person to another
bar where they trampled the female owner
and beat the bartender unconscious said
bartender was held in the er
for more than a week when he was
released he found out that he had been
charged with assault the men arrested at
the black cat were charged with lewd
conduct
all of them were found guilty on
february 11
1967 la's first gay demonstration to
protest police brutality took place
organized by pride personal rights in
defense and education
a group of younger gay men and lesbians
this event occurred more than
two years before the famous stonewall
riots sparking a rebellious streak in a
young filmmaker
named tom de simone a graduate of ucla's
film program
dissimone had worked for several years
in the film industry as an editor and
had directed a low-budget horror movie
that
had went nowhere he had been growing
bored of the soft-core well-oiled eight
millimeter bob miser clones that it
started filling gay porno theaters
and thought he could do better he began
filming erotic gay scenes with full
nudity but
simulated sex he delighted in more
psychological porn i was very
disappointed with films shown at the
park theater
he recalled later i remember seeing a
lot of young kids in them jumping around
on pogo sticks and other such nonsense
the quality of the films was terrible
they were badly photographed and the
projection was lousy
i wanted to make one of these films and
really show some quality work
his first film to receive a wide release
or as wide as gay porn could go back
then
was the story of a gay man who kidnaps
young men and keeps them locked up in
cages for his sexual pleasure
while there was nudity the sex remained
simulated and no erections were shown on
screen
nevertheless the film drew the attention
of s m lovers
but also the fbi who harassed any
theater promoting a showing of the film
it was eventually cited by the u.s
commission on obscenity and pornography
as an unhealthy example of pornographic
film
dissimon's no erection s m wasn't flying
with the majority of patrons at gay porn
theaters either
they were seeing more and more eight
millimeter shorts involving actual sex
coming from unnamed parties
and so simulated sex kinky or not wasn't
going to cut it
making hardcore was against the law
according to captain jack wilson of the
lapd
you cannot make a hardcore film without
violating the prostitution laws when you
pay actors to engage in sex or oral
copulation
you've violated the laws you've
solicited individuals to engage in
prostitution by asking them to exchange
sex
for money because hardcore producers in
the early 70s operated outside the law
many were fly-by-night operations
stories were written on matchbook covers
and dialogue was made up by performers
more noted for their looks than their
writing talent
one producer observed at the time
filming takes place on a single day
and the results are sometimes little
more than records of sexual activity
framed by the collective sexual
fantasies of the people who filmed and
edit one film a week
every week of the year the switch over
to hardcore dramatically altered how sex
movies would be made
tom de simone believed that having to
perform real sex
changed who would be cast in hardcore
movies when you get into hardcore you're
dealing with a different class of people
you can't get actors or actresses
anymore just pimps and [ __ ]
but not everyone felt that way late one
night in 1970 after a rehearsal for his
new broadway show
director and choreographer wakefield
poole his boyfriend peter
and some friends decided to go to the
park miller theater to see one of
disimon's films
it turned out to be a disappointing
evening and for poole a somewhat jarring
experience
unlike the dark and cruisy theaters that
screened straight porn
the lights inside the park miller
theater were bright enough that the
theater's customers could actually read
indeed one patron pool reported was
reading the new york times
afterward they wondered aloud whether it
was possible to make a hardcore film
that was more erotic
and that wasn't so degrading
poole decided to find out
[Music]
like many other gay men wakefield pool
had come to new york in search of
something
he was a settler to use the new yorker
writer eb white's term
it was the settlers who gave new york
its passion
poole grew up in the south but moved to
new york city as soon as he could to
pursue a career as a dancer
when his lover peter gave poole a 16
millimeter movie camera as a gift
almost immediately he began to
experiment with it
inspired by several amateur movies made
by steven sondheim shown at parties and
other social occasions
poole created a series of multimedia
dance events using light projections and
film
in addition to more traditional stage
elements
he had also shot a short film in homage
to andy warhol after finding a painting
of himself in one of warhol's shows
several months after their outing to the
park miller theater poole and peter were
invited out to the fire island pines to
stay with friends
a narrow strip of sand and shrubbery
along the southern coast of long island
fire island was in the process of
becoming a mythic landscape
andre holleran wrote in his novel dancer
for the dance
fire island was for madness for hot
nights
kisses and herds of stunning men a
national game preserve annually
replenished by men each summer arrived
from every state in the union
cherry grove on fire island the tiny
neighboring community to the south of
the pines
had been a well-known holiday
destination of gay actors writers and
artists since the 1930s
and a predominantly gay community making
it america's first gay and lesbian town
the poet w h auden and his partner
chester coleman regularly came out to
the grove in the early 40s
they were joined by an array of famous
gay artists and writers like christopher
isherwood tennessee williams
and truman capote poole and his partner
made plans to spend several months on
fire island
and it was during this time that he
decided he would make his erotic movie
once he had formulated his plot and
begun to script it he started to think
about how to cast it
he first asked his friends that he was
staying with who agreed but immediately
had second thoughts
hours later poole ran into a man named
dino who worked in a little gift shop at
the hotel in the pines
the three of us had been flirting for
weeks poole recalled
i suddenly turned to him and asked him
if he'd like to be in a film with peter
they both looked a bit startled but
moments later we agreed to shoot the
next day at 6am
over the next few months poole edited
the scene into a 15 minute movie
when he showed it to a group of friends
they claimed that it was the best porn
movie they'd ever seen
marvin shulman his business manager
offered to invest in expanding it into a
feature-length movie
over a series of mondays pool shot the
rest of the film
that would make him famous it premiered
in downtown manhattan to sold out
showings of gay men straight couples and
film reviewers
with rave reviews from multiple
mainstream publications
the film broke through the red velvet
curtain that separated porn
from legitimate movies wakefield pool
wasn't the only star to rise from boys
in the sand though
he also lucked into discovering the
first gay porn superstar
with casey donovan donovan had gone from
sixth grade teacher to fashion model to
porn star in the run of three years
and boys in the sand owed much of its
success to him and he said
i have this friend named wakefield pool
he used to be a dancer and a director
choreographer
and he's doing some experimental movies
on his own
out at fire island and i know you just
did this hardcore buck film
and would you be interested in being in
it i said well you know maybe i'd
i'd like to meet him and and maybe see
what he's done and then the rest is
history
boys in the sand catapulted casey
donovan into a unique position as the
first gay porn star
characterized as a gay liberated robert
redford the all-american male
he resembled and aptly symbolized the
newly liberated gay men living in new
york city during the 1970s
blonde and blue-eyed with a well-toned
body and absolutely radiant smile
donovan exuded sex appeal and
communicated an almost irresistible
charisma
soon after boys in the sand opened after
dark a well-regarded arts magazine that
dabbled in soft core porn
published a headshot of donovan in brief
mention of his appearance in boys in the
sand
then in march it offered an upper body
shot of donovan while referring to a
recent theatrical appearance
finally in july donovan appeared on the
cover with a spread in the side
a gay porn star had just become a
national celebrity
within weeks of boys in the sands
premiere jerry douglas a young
playwright and off-broadway director who
had directed a couple of nude plays
somewhat unique 1960s specialty
was approached by a director of tv
commercials to make a gay pornographic
film
producing a hardcore film was still
considered such a taboo project
that the film's backers asked douglas to
not reveal the production company's name
to anyone
to memorize the firm's address and
telephone number and to never put
anything in writing
the film would be a riff on the best
picture-winning midnight cowboy
and douglas decided without any
hesitation to cast casey donovan in the
lead
it opened a year later to packed
theaters in new york la san francisco
and montreal
but because exhibiting porn was a legal
gray area at the time
it was hard for filmmakers to ensure
that they were getting their cut
and there was no way of guaranteeing
that a theater owner wouldn't simply
duplicate the film print
give back the original and continue to
show the movie without ever having to
pay another dime
so theater owners in new jersey and san
francisco were shocked
when they were visited by members of the
new york mafia
gay porn producers decided to take a
page from the straight porn book
and enlist the help of la casa nostra in
ensuring they got paid
this partnership eventually led to gay
porn being exhibited in mafia-owned
theaters in
most major cities removing the middleman
and increasing profits for both
producers and their italian enforcers
while the involvement of the mafia led
to many filmmakers leaving the business
jerry douglas among them it gave the
world of gay adult cinema
a solid bedrock to grow from unlike art
house theaters mafia run cinemas had the
money to bribe cops
who would have otherwise confiscated
prince as obscene artifacts
gay porn now had creative and innovative
filmmakers
nationally famous stars a growing fan
base
and a rock solid distribution channel
there was nowhere to go but up
the supreme court ruled today that if
anyone wants to read dirty books or look
at dirty movies in his own home
he may do so and it's none of the law's
business
the law still may regulate the spread of
obscenity in public
but the court said a person has every
right to satisfy his intellectual and
emotional needs
in the privacy of his own home that the
law has no business telling anyone
alone at home what books he may read or
what films
he may look at chuck holmes was the
sales manager for a company that
manufactured pre-fabricated houses
this super exciting career was what
brought him to san francisco in the
early 1970s
just in time for recession after losing
his job
since who can buy homes during a
recession even prefabricated ones
a friend of his suggested he start a
mail-order business selling gay porn
which is everyone's go-to when they lose
their job he took the advice and
borrowed 4 200
to purchase a handful of already made
films and launched falcon studios in
april
1972. i wanted something that had an
image of fierceness and power and grace
and was
natural i thought a falcon represented
that
it was a bird of prey with sexual acts
at least the way that we make him here
at falcon
there's generally someone who is the
predator and someone who's the prey
no i don't mean that in a harmful way
but by the end of a falcon film somebody
has snatched
someone and given it to him good
business was slow at first since there
was a lack of product
he was relying on local producers to
provide him with the eight millimeter
shorts he'd be selling
growing impatient with their inability
to provide on time chuck decided to
start producing his own films
the first movie falcon made was a
two-part loop called muscle
sweat and brawn holmes followed these up
with taste my love part one and two
and ace in the hole subtlety in movie
titles was not his strong suit
most of falcon's short starred handsome
and sexually energetic young men who
went by nondescript names like tom
dan gary dave kenny rod phillip michael
bill and pete
a formula that would be replicated in
the new millennium by producers like
sean cody and corbin fisher
falcon followed the erotic formulas
developed by earlier producers
but in a more blunt fashion most of the
shorts portrayed sex scenes in a
straightforward manner with
simple production values lighting always
the most difficult to manage production
factor varied greatly from film to film
there were almost never expensive or
exotic locations and the loops rarely
showed dramatic or sexual action
that extended over a period of time
these were after all only short movies
consisting of one scene no more than 15
or 20 minutes long
for the most part they were built around
an anecdote never a full-fledged story
they merely provided a setup that
created a charged atmosphere
in which the sexual action could take
place from the beginning
holmes clearly envisioned the falcon
brand of sexual content to be
fast urgent desperate sexual contact
between two or more persons
as desperate as we can capture on film
or video
the basic formula at falcon has not
changed and i do not foresee it changing
he said decades later more important
than picture sound quality for holmes
was grooming nobody could have dirty
feet in a falcon video
because i come from the midwest and
they'd have these vfw
stags where they'd have these porno
movies and all the men and all the women
would
always have dirty feet and i always
thought those lazy bastards why don't
they wash those people's feet it's
distracting
holmes wanted to see the boy next door
who looked like they wouldn't ever do
anything but be the best little fellows
the little businessman the good members
of their community
and all of a sudden they'd just kiss
each other and all hell would break
loose and they'd just try to
[ __ ] each other to death holmes adopted
a business model built on aggressive
pricing and marketing policies
falcons set its price is considerably
above those of other companies eight
millimeter shorts
the high prices falcon charged for films
and later for its videos
went far beyond what was necessary to
support its cost to production
from the beginning falcon operated
strictly as a mail order business
though hardcore theatrical releases were
garnering other producers acclaim and
prestige
theatrical distribution was both more
expensive and riskier than the
production of shorts for mail order
distribution
we didn't want to let 16 millimeter
prints out of our hands
that's all you needed to make an
inter-negative and make all the eight
millimeter and super eight copies you
ever wanted
and back then there were a lot of people
in this business who did a lot of
illegal duping
falcon's policies stressing its mail
order business catered to customers who
were older and wealthier than the
audiences who attended theater showings
more closeted as well they were also
more likely to live outside the
metropolitan
areas that had large and growing gay
communities
falcon essentially moved gay porn to the
suburbs
throughout the 70s john travis matt
sterling falcon studios and numerous
other producers of gay male porn
incorporated a great deal of san
francisco's gay sexual culture
the scale and intensity of the city's
sexual scene had created a distinctive
world of shared experience
anonymous sex in a communal setting in a
sex club or a bath house or at an orgy
led to a community based on pleasure
rather than politics
performing in porn was merely an
extension of the communal sex in which
so many men took part
the city's pornographers often took
their scenarios and images from the
city's gay sex life itself
they recruited performers from the
community and they translated their own
sexual experiences to the screen
in the fall of 1977 chuck holmes met
with his production and marketing staff
to discuss
upcoming projects falcon's cameraman of
the moment colin meyer
a recent graduate of the film program at
san francisco state university
suggested that they make a series of
short loops putting all the biggest porn
icons at the time into one movie
three generations of the top gay porn
stars as it were
they decided the film would feature
three main stars al parker who had
become famous as a cult model
dick fisk a young up and coming
performer
and the by now legendary star casey
donovan
in a world of entertainment that had now
seen jaws and star wars change the movie
industry
this trio of gay porn royalty would make
up the lead attraction
of the industry's first blockbuster the
other side of aspen
if casey donovan was the linchpin al
parker was the top dog
donovan and parker had never met but
donovan were considered parker one of
his porno dream men
almost 10 years younger than donovan
parker was born
andrew oaken in 1952. parker seemed
destined for porn since the day when as
a 15 year old
he stumbled across a tattered magazine
that included beefcake photos from the
legendary cult studios
around that same time parker attended
the famous concert at woodstock where he
spent practically the entire weekend in
the back of a hearse
having sex with a hell's angels biker
and though barely in attendance at the
concert itself
he did manage to show up on the poster
for the movie
the other side of aspen had started out
as a series of loops but once holmes
decided to create a framework linking
the scenes it quickly morphed into
falcon's first feature film
the production was probably the
smoothest porn shoot to date
having been cast with industry pros and
a strong directorial voice behind the
camera
it ran like a well-oiled machine once
filming had wrapped
falcon ramped up its marketing strategy
by sending out a pre-mailer with
reservation cards to its best customers
reservations poured back in then a
brochure was mailed
the response to the brochure was even
more enthusiastic
producing the highest revenues in the
history of the company up to that point
five to seven times greater than ever
before the other side of aspen was
falcon's first blockbuster and like all
blockbusters it accounted for the lion's
share of falcon's earnings
its explosive impact marked a turning
point for a company selling its films
only through mail-order transactions
unwittingly preparing it for the coming
age of the vcr
falcon deciding to release the film on
vhs instead of betamax is considered by
home video experts
to be one of the reasons that vhs would
go on to win the format war against
sony's higher quality but more expensive
to produce betamax
it was good timing since many adult
theaters were being shut down
the success of aspen transformed falcon
into a different sort of company
one that began to increase its
production values and adopt other
policies such as signing performers as
exclusives
an old school hollywood tactic that had
died out with the death of the studio
system
keeping certain stars under exclusivity
contracts in exchange for regular
paychecks
and only loaning them out for exorbitant
fees that made falcon into a powerhouse
of gay porn companies
with aspen falcon discovered the midas
formula
it went on to produce four sequels in
its aspen series over the next few
decades
often starring the most popular
performers of the day a sort of gay porn
time capsule
falcon studios had built its brand as a
gay macho fantasy
the studio skewed anything that appeared
campier less than rigorously masculine
following the model the rest of the
industry had been built on for years
the castro clone archetype butch men
with middle class jobs
had permeated gay porn all the way back
to the photography of bob miser
but the other side of aspen was a
milestone for the gay porn film industry
it signaled the culmination of the gay
macho sexual ethos
and turned the ideal gay male body young
men with a swimmer's build no tattoos
and little body hair
the age of twinks had begun
[Music]
william higgins was a late bloomer he
was approaching 35 and had never had sex
with either a man or a woman
he was running a stained glass business
in houston where he taught housewives
how to make stained glass decorations
for their homes
he explored his sexuality by going to
theaters to watch gay porn
but he thought the movies were so bad
that he decided he wanted to go to
california and try to make better ones
and so in early 1978 higgins set out for
san francisco
though he only got as far as los angeles
there he headed for hollywood
because someone had told him that that
was the gay area of town
as he drove down santa monica boulevard
lined with hustlers
he knew he was in the right place
stopping for a bite to eat higgins met a
man and told him he'd specifically come
out to california to make a gay porn
movie
the man encouraged him well okay let's
do it he said
the man helped higgins to find a cast
and they shot the film in his apartment
the film would go on to be called a
married man it starred jack wrangler one
of the leading stars of the time
it all seemed so easy but filming was a
disaster
none of the performers got along they
disagreed about shooting performance and
editing
higgins had virtually no previous
experience with photography or
production
the film had been loaded backwards into
the camera and ended up underexposed
nor did he have enough sexual experience
he had never even seen two men having
sex up close
though the century theater booked the
film the owner
of new york's adonis theater declined
it was such an unpleasant experience the
higgins decided to call it quits
he then took a job as a clerk at a bath
house in the san fernando valley
and settled down in venice beach venice
beach with its scantily dressed surfers
and shirtless young men roller skating
proved to be too titillating a sexual
scene for higgins to ignore
i was walking around venice beach and i
said
oh this would really be an interesting
movie
and so i started shooting some footage
with film that we had left over from
making a married man
the footage shot sat on the shelf until
he received a call from monroe buehler
an independent producer infamous in
hollywood for producing gay erotica wow
we really liked a married man and i'm
looking for a picture as my big
christmas feature which is
you know an important thing why don't
you make another film
higgins quickly agreed and put together
a film he called the boys of venice
set along venice beach the movie was
built around the youth culture that had
emerged incorporating the new roller
skating fad into the movie
the opening scene of the film takes
place in a small bathroom with two
performers having sex with roller skates
on
stunt doubles probably would have been a
good idea the boys of venice was a
tremendous box office success and
decisively launched higgins on his
career
he set up his own companies to handle
production laguna pacific and
distribution
catalina video and went on to become the
most prolific gay porn filmmaker in the
united states
over the next five years he made 20
movies most of them record-breaking
successes
though boys of venice was filmed without
a lead kip noel emerged as the star of
the movie
he was the first major twink porn star
in fact
he personified the twink an attractive
young gay man with a slender build and
little or no body hair originally
recommended to higgins by monroe beeler
noel was not new to gay porn he had
performed before in a series of loops
for director mark reynolds
generally assumed to be straight null
actually seduced higgins on their first
meeting
when kipnuhl got off the plane he really
didn't look that good
he had a look about him that was kind of
butch but not that attractive
part of it was his having a little
mustache that didn't work
overall he just didn't look like he
would photograph that well
higgins was about to send him back home
but i thought
i had to at least interview him the
first thing he did was say
let me show you what i look like and he
dropped his pants
which made me take a second look at him
at that point he said well why don't you
take your clothes off
now i try to keep these things very
above board and business like but
he insisted for many kip knoll was the
iconic william higgins star
over the next three years they made four
other films together
kip knoll and the west side boys pacific
coast highway
class of 84 part 2 and brothers should
do it
the prolific filmmaker was dominating
the video market when he decided to try
an experiment the experiment turned into
the film
class reunion a feature where he decided
to use all the stars from the past
invitations were sent out to 15 years
worth of performers but higgins had no
idea how many might eventually show up
for the shoot
multiple buses worth of performers ended
up making their way to the glendale
mansion in which they were filming some
people even snuck in who had never been
in a movie before
the shoot more or less became a giant
orgy
with three cameramen tracking around the
room constantly like an extended scene
from caligula
class reunion wowed audiences with the
sheer amount of men on film all at once
something that ambitious hadn't been
tried in gay or straight porn up to that
point
higgins would consider it his
masterpiece
an ode to the joy and sexual abundance
gay men enjoyed at the time
it was the early 1980s
and that was all about to change
[Music]
the discovery of what would eventually
become aids a new sexually transmitted
disease a disease that destroyed the
very mechanism that normally protected
the body from diseases
created a sequence of crises medical
social and political the aids epidemic
also provoked a crisis regarding sex
itself within the gay community
namely bareback sex however before the
virus that caused aids was even
identified sexual promiscuity was
believed by many to be the most likely
aspect of the gay lifestyle responsible
for the spread of the disease
then simply called the gay cancer was
the sex gay men engaged in inherently
dangerous or bad
could gay men continue to engage in sex
at all if they risk death from aids
how could gay men have sex in an
epidemic of a sexually transmitted
disease
the debates both inside and outside the
gay community produced fatal
displacements
many of those most concerned failed to
address either the practical actions
one could take to prevent spreading the
disease or how best to defend gay male
sexuality in the situation
as leo bersani pointed out attention
turned away from the kinds of sex people
practiced
to a moralistic discourse about
promiscuity
the crisis about sex also created a
profound sense of paranoia
sex is just a completely different thing
now porn star and director al parker
exclaimed
the entire time you're having sex you're
thinking i'm having sex with
everybody this person's ever had sex
with i wonder what he's done i wonder
where he's been if he's positive or
negative i wonder if i'm
giving him anything and you if you can
keep a heart on
while that's going on in your head
you're better than i am
since the aids epidemic had begun in
1981 the public debate about gay men's
sexual activities had grown increasingly
virulent
their sexual promiscuity was often
targeted as a public menace
in particular the danger posed by men
engaging in anal intercourse
with particular ire directed toward
those who were both topped
and bottomed since the late 70s anal sex
had become the focal point of gay porn
while it is difficult to document the
shift away from oral sex as the
normative activity
to anal sex was one of the major changes
that accompanied the sexual revolution
of the 60s and 70s
and one of the most notable developments
of gay male sexuality since the
stonewall riots
was the dramatic increase of sexual
versatility
by 1985 the growing furor over gay men's
sexuality explicitly promiscuity and
more implicitly their sexual versatility
caused many producers of gay porn to
re-examine how sex between men should be
represented in erotic videos
i think that when aids happen it was
devastating to this business
i think it scared the [ __ ] out of
everybody when we
found out how it was being produced and
of course when we then found out all of
our actors were dying
i mean i think it changed the industry a
lot some people
went out of business i think because of
that aids activists and gay leaders
argue that porn should help eroticize
safer sex
porn stars could serve as role models
for condom use
directors and producers hesitated to use
condoms because they believed that
showing performers taking precautions
and using condoms would inhibit the
sexual arousal porn films were meant to
provoke
nevertheless they paid some lip service
to these concerns
they were doing everything but using
condoms they were dancing around that
issue i would talk to chuck and i would
say you need to use condoms chuck you
have to use condoms i remember that was
one of the big bones of contention with
falcon was that they they were sort of
the last ones to come on board with
using a condom
the feeling was that the consumer
wouldn't buy a product that
depicted condoms in 1988 chris mann the
vice president of catalina video
announced that
aids became a factor about three years
ago we've really taken a hard look at
the situation
we've had to this is something that
drastically affects the entire nature of
our business
for activists and community leaders the
importance of porn stars
acting as role models blended with
concerns that sexual activities on the
set posed risks to the performers
most people in the industry believe that
the sex that took place on porn sets was
relatively safe
since performers had to pull out for the
money shot industry insiders frequently
argued that most performers understood
the risk and willingly chose to take it
in order to create fantasies that would
encourage many viewers to stay home
rather than engage in high-risk sex with
another person
man explained what we would like to do
is have the erotic industry be a
positive influence
not a negative one the public knows
there's a health crisis
we show them how to have sex safely
and still make it a fun joyous
experience part of the celebration of
being
gay is the celebration of your sexuality
if we did only safe sex films the erotic
value would truly be gone
after all when you watch a regular film
you don't go out and drive your car the
way those people do in street chases
it's a fantasy not real life
for decades gay sex had been limited
only by the sexually repressive society
there were no natural limits to
threatened anyone's lifestyle
no pregnancy to worry about it almost
seemed that in
sex everything was possible aids
suddenly put on limits now sex
especially anal sex had potentially
fatal consequences
various studios claimed that they
screamed the actors who appeared in
their movies and used only healthy
performers
in an effort to avoid losing their
audience with performances that only
consisted of safer sex
studios first tried a more didactic
approach
starting in 1987 both catalina and
falcon studios
put three-minute long instructional
trailers produced by the gay men's
health crisis
on their videotapes even as late as 1988
condoms are
apparent only in a minority of films
many producers and studios left safe sex
up to the performers themselves director
jd slater who adopted this laissez-faire
approach said
as far as safe sex in my work is
concerned i will not preach
or morally judge i am simply a
documentarian of
sexual incidents what an actor does is
completely his own decision
i let an actor do exactly what he wants
any way he wants to do it
some directors think it's their job to
instruct the public on safe sex
and for them that's great but that's not
my responsibility
there had always been a group of gay men
who were ambivalent about porn
they believed that porn promoted certain
stereotypes of masculinity and
represented commodified forms of
physical desirability
but with porn increasingly considered a
safe alternative to casual sex
they had come to believe that the aids
epidemic had to some extent
legitimized porn porn became another
form of safe sex
ironically while discussions among gay
porn producers were taking place
a fierce debate raged in congress over
funding for aids education
information or prevention materials on
october 11 1987 over half a million
lesbians gay men and their supporters
one of the largest demonstrations ever
to take place in washington dc
marched both for their civil rights and
to protest the reagan administration's
failure to act promptly to address the
aids epidemic
the names project presented its memorial
quilt on the washington
mall in which the names of people who
had died of aids were inscribed in over
2 000
panels it covered the equivalent of two
football fields
days later in his introduction to a
debate senator jesse helms from north
carolina dismissed the demonstration as
this mob over here this weekend he then
proceeded to introduce legislation
guaranteeing that no aids prevention
literature
or efforts would go to gay communities
the amendment he proposed sought to
prohibit the use of any funds provided
under this
act to the centers for disease control
from being used to provide
aids education information or prevention
materials and activities that promote
encourage or condone homosexual
sexual activities there is a
feeling among members of any of
a number of professions or just the
general population
that patients with aids many of whom are
homosexual are a little bit different
i think that that has led to a little
bit of a complacency
about the approach towards this disease
it seemed that neither congress nor the
gay porn industry
wanted to acknowledge that condoms would
make sex safer
nevertheless some insiders were critical
of the porn industry's stance
terry legrand of marathon films declared
producers are very wrong when they say
we must produce a fantasy for the viewer
i say
[ __ ] fantasy time is over fantasy
has to stop
i think the biggest message we can give
to people is through
videotapes as long as it's you know
subtly done
if they see enough movies where people
are getting screwed with condoms
then maybe it will become a part of
their own lives
not long after making that statement
commercial producers attempting to be
responsible
and activists and public health
educators wanting to be effective
adopted similar approaches they finally
began producing safe sex porn
though many companies refused to give in
to condom usage until the dawn of the
90s
despite the chaos of the aids crisis or
more likely because of it
the porn industry was booming in the
1980s
as dave kinnick a gay porn reviewer and
videographer noted
the anti-sex backlash of the 80s had a
devastating effect on the nation's
bathhouses and x-rated theaters but it
fueled profits
in the video industry people may have
stopped having sex but they certainly
hadn't stopped
wanting sex like bathtub gin during
prohibition the popularity of videos
soared casey donovan was actively
involved in
several of the early attempts to develop
safe sex videos
but otherwise he saw no need to change
his own way of life
while sex was the basis of donovan's
professional life it also continued to
be one of the most important activities
in his personal life
he seemed to be almost insatiable and
would frequently engage in casual sex
between appointments with his escorting
clients
toward the end of 1984 donovan and
wakefield pool decided to return to fire
island and shoot boys in the sand too
they both hoped the sequel would revive
their sagging fortunes
neither had achieved any great success
independently of their first joint
venture
he hoped the sequel might again put him
on the covers of magazines and give him
national recognition
one friend recalled that he was more
buliant than ever
and i could clearly see that he was
trying to keep in check his
fantasies of becoming the man of the
moment all over again
but the film wasn't released until two
years later the producer had died of a
heart attack on the day pool started
shooting the film
and the ownership of the film stock was
subject to legal battles lasting over 20
months
by the time it came out in 1986 there
was no buzz or anticipation
no moment of renewed celebrity the world
it came into was quite different from
the one the original boys in the sand
had entered
it was more competitive in a field
created by the new technology of video
and the sequel offered a vision of sex
that seemed outdated
in the era already dealing with aids it
seemed innocent
and naive boys in the sand too opens
with donovan and another man having sex
in the shrubbery
in another scene the famous scene from
the first version of boys in the sand is
reprised
in which donovan emerges from the bay
only in this film a young pat allen
emerges from the bay
as donovan returns to the waves
seemingly forever
a year later in august of 1987 casey
donovan passed away
though he never publicly disclosed his
infection
aids had now claimed gay porn's first
[Music]
superstar
on march 10 1987 larry kramer stood
before a large audience of gay men at
new york's lesbian
and gay community center in greenwich
village cramer was the country's most
vocal critic of both the federal
government and gay communities failure
to address the aids crisis
in 1983 he had founded gay men's health
crisis to provide support
and social services for the gay men
stricken with the disease
two years later he wrote the normal
heart one of the longest running plays
ever at the public theater
to dramatize the situation behind its
establishment on that march evening
kramer read from his 1983
aids manifesto 1112 and counting
our continued existence depends on just
how angry you can get
four years later the number of aids
cases had reached 32 thousand
while any number of issues spurred his
wrath that evening the tipping point was
the overly restrictive drug testing
policy of the federal government's food
and drug administration
which thus far had prevented the
development of any medicine to treat hiv
and aids he was also exasperated by the
failure of gay men's health crisis to
lobby
or take an advocacy role he appealed to
his audience
do you want me to start a new
organization devoted solely to political
action
a huge yes rose from the audience two
days later more than 300 people met to
found the aids coalition to unleash
power
act up their first political action was
a large demonstration on wall street
to protest the lack of corporate
initiative on development of drugs to
treat hiv and aids
in the years that followed act up gained
thousands of members and 70 chapters in
the united states and abroad
the gay community had reached a breaking
point
joey yale who appeared in la plays
itself died of aids
on april 18 1986.
he was 36 years old jw king's stardom
brothers should do it and these bases
are loaded with his fictive brother john
king
one of the most popular gay porn stars
of the late 70s and early 80s
he died of aids in los angeles on
december 5th 1986.
he was 31. gay porn film director arthur
brenson died
of aids on july 28 1987 at 44.
his film pleasure beach won the first
annual gay erotic film award in 1985.
casey donovan died of aids in florida on
august 10th 1987
none of his friends or family knew that
he had aids
he was 43.
john holmes who boasted that he had sex
with more than 1400 partners
died of aids on march 13th 1988.
he was 43. photographer robert
maplethorpe died of aids in a hospital
in boston on march 9 1989.
he was 42. johnny dawes the star of
arthur brenson's prize-winning pleasure
beach died of aids on july 25th
1989. he was 34.
[Music]
as the aids epidemic devastated the
lives of gay men more gay men were
choosing to stay at home and watch
pornography than go out and cruise for
sex
at the height of the epidemic in the
fall of 1988
jerry douglas launched the first issue
of man shots
a new magazine dedicated to covering gay
porn films
one of the articles in that issue was
about safe sex videos
and another was an obituary to porn star
eric striker
the fictive brother of gay porn megastar
jeff striker
it was the first time any publication
devoted to erotic photography and porn
had published an obituary of a porn star
it was to be a regular feature of man
shots magazine
douglas felt that it was time for the
adult film industry to acknowledge that
many performers were dying
of aids in the editorial introduction
douglas compared the origins of
mainstream filmmaking with the
development of gay porn
during the 20s when silent filmmaking
was at its zenith few of its
practitioners thought of their work as
an
art form or imagined one day their
flickers would be
treasured in museums and archival vaults
silent film making if we are to believe
the memoirs of griffith chaplin and
especially senate
with a carefree chaotic business in
which people were delighted to be paid
for being a little bit crazy
today historians dig with the intensity
of archaeologists to reconstruct the
days and data of that era
we suspect in time the output of the
carefree chaotic business of skinflix
will also achieve the status of
treasures
and future historians will likewise try
to reconstruct the days of early porn
to that end this magazine attempts to
give some order to the first quarter
century of gay erotic filmmaking
jerry douglas saw many of his friends in
the industry die of aids
drug overdoses and suicide but
he lived long enough to see the
memorialize in a class on the history of
gay erotica
taught at his alma mater yale university
not long after helping to launch man
shots magazine jerry douglas decided it
was about time he returned to producing
films
for his first project fratrimony douglas
wrote a short script about two brothers
and their sexual obsession with each
other
since it was his first film in 14 years
he sought to make it as contained as
possible
both thematically and practically all of
the film's action takes place in one
house
and only two performers appear in it it
was unusual for a pornographic film to
have only two performers
but the movie was an immediate hit a
master had returned to the industry
the film was nominated for avn awards
for best gay picture
best gay actor and best gay director the
success of fratrimony inspired douglas
to make another film
almost immediately the germ of a new
idea began to grow
while at the annual avn awards show in
las vegas douglas has seen shishi leroux
the drag persona of up-and-coming porn
director larry pasciotti
perform and was stunned by her
flamboyant presence and style
larue was a lavish personality who
frequently emceed and sang at industry
events
though they had long had a telephone
relationship while douglas was a
magazine editor and larue the marketing
and promotions manager at catalina video
douglas had never seen larue perform she
had recently left catalina to direct
videos for anahana productions
after seeing her performance in las
vegas douglas wanted to build a movie
around leroux
but he asked himself how do i build a
gay porn movie
around a full-figured drag queen it came
to him over lunch with larue who
brought along a handsome brunette
performer named joey stefano
at lunch that day stefano talked about
the difficulties he had coming to terms
with his sexuality because of his
catholic background
stefano's struggles gave douglas an idea
within weeks of returning from la
douglas had written a script about a
young man's coming to terms with his
homosexuality against the backdrop of
the catholic church
and aids activism douglas incorporated
some aspects of the relationship between
larue and stefano as well
douglas felt that more of a man was the
first real film i made
i think that's the first time i really
hit my stride and got it right
all the elements came together not only
douglas's extensive experience as a
playwright and theater director
his pioneering role as a director of
erotic films and his wealth of knowledge
of the gay world as a journalist and
observer
but also the strong erotic appeal of the
actors and above all
the exact and delicate appreciation
of the historical forces sweeping across
the gay world
more of a man sets the sexual action in
the actual context of gay male life in
the late 1980s
a time overwhelmed by the aids epidemic
filled with the fear of sex and riddled
by doubts that aids could be stopped
the main characters represented the two
poles of gay male sexual life
one a young man torn by guilt and
self-hatred overwhelmed with a sense of
sin and unwilling to identify himself as
gay
and the other a self-accepting gay man
in a long-term relationship
an aids activist the young construction
worker engages in risky sexual
encounters with strangers
anonymous sex and public bathrooms while
the activist uses a condom even during
sex with his long-term partner
the film was made within an industry
that had hesitated for years to portray
explicit sexual action using a condom
douglas showed that within the grim
historical setting powerful and arousing
sex could take place
more of a man won four awards at the
1990 avn awards
including the best gay video best
screenplay
best non-sexual role for shishuluru and
best performer for joey stefano
stefano was born nicholas iacona on new
year's day
1968. after his father's death when he
was 15
he resolved to escape his small town of
chester pennsylvania by becoming a model
he put together a portfolio with the
help of a local photographer
and soon met tony davis an adult
performer who introduced nicholas to gay
porn
after meeting shishi leroux who
christened him joey stefano
and starring in more of a man he
instantly rose to stardom
not just within the world of gay porn
but outside it as well
he created a hit clothing line and was
featured in multiple madonna projects
the singer was so smitten with joey that
she was apparently devastated when she
found out that he was actually gay and
not gay
for pay talent agent david del val who
represented multiple hollywood actors
and some of the biggest stars on
broadway
was thoroughly convinced that he could
turn joey into a leading man
and began shopping him around to casting
directors
shockingly they were pretty open to
having him read for upcoming parts gay
porn history or not
he was a talented actor oozed charisma
and had the type of movie star good
looks that are rare
like tom cruise with prettier eyes joey
also took frequent trips back to
pennsylvania
to visit his older sister linda who he
adored and who had helped him get sober
after developing a drug problem in his
late teens
a habit he'd picked up to numb the pain
after his father's death
he was a doting uncle to her children
and even gave her away at her wedding
on one trip back in 1994 he told her
that he planned to leave porn
since david dalvall was busy lining him
up auditions for mainstream movies
in the meantime he was willing to mop
floors or wash dishes
whatever it took to keep the bills paid
while he waited for his hollywood dream
to come true
before leaving linda's house that summer
he told her that he had some
unfinished business in la it was in la
that he received the news that he was
hiv positive
there was still no effective treatment
for the disease and he felt hopeless
joey stefano was found nearly lifeless
in a hollywood motel room
his ashen body spread across
sweat-soaked sheets
garbed in only a red hoodie he was
pronounced dead later that day at cedar
sinai medical center
the cause of death was an overdose of
cocaine morphine and heroin
a lethal combination that everyone who
knew him said was obviously suicide
i'll always wonder whether i could have
gotten through to him that night whether
he could have believed what i was
telling him del val said later
could he have had an acting career
because let me tell you he really had it
the ramifications of the aids crisis
continued to rock the porn world well
after the discovery of protease
inhibitors that kept the disease more or
less at bay
much like the rest of the gay community
stars in the gay porn world spent a
decade and a half burying their friends
colleagues and lovers
it wasn't until stray people began
contracting the disease via blood
transfusions
that any money was put into aids
research in america
the bulk of said money was earmarked for
abstinence campaigns
instead of research or safe sex
awareness the christian right wing and
let's be honest many of the left wing as
well
argued that porn stars and sex workers
should be excluded from any kind of
possible aids-related government-funded
assistance
or even drug trials video stores under
pressure from family groups
began to carry fewer adult titles
arguing that porn with or without a
condom
straight or gay would lead to dangerous
sexual practices
especially among college students away
from their parents watchful eyes
many convenience stores stopped carrying
adult magazines the playboy penthouse
and hustler were mostly safe
and under the guise of stopping sex
trafficking the clinton administration
advised the u.s postal service to stop
transporting pornographic material it
wasn't illegal to sell porn in your
stores or for shipping companies to
deliver it
but at the time some people in the
industry felt like they were just
waiting for the other shoe to drop
bill clinton's re-election campaign in
1996 turned shockingly conservative
across the board
and with the recent underage porn
scandals surrounding tracy lourdes
many directors producers and performers
felt that
porn's time in america might have come
to an end
but then
the birth of the internet was a
revolution for many industries but most
of all porn
making the purchase of adult films
easier and more private
the internet helped the industry grow
from an industry worth an estimated 800
million dollars in 1996
to 10 billion dollars in 2006.
the adult entertainment industry
revolutionized the internet as well
it was pornography producers that
finance the software and technology
necessary to make secure online
purchases with credit cards
a conglomerate of gay porn studios hired
coding specialists in the mid 90s
to streamline the display of photos
online and then the ability to stream
video
technology that would later be adopted
by facebook instagram and youtube
european gay porn studio bellamy was the
first company to stream live video over
the internet
creating a whole new industry of webcam
sex shows
in 2003 their streaming technology was
bought by a small telecommunications
startup
called skype by 2010 pornography was
estimated to make up ten percent of the
entire internet
in 2020 that estimate has changed to 30
percent
there are more paid subscribers to porn
sites in 2020 than there are to netflix
and that's not taking into account the
vast amount of ad-supported porn on
sites like x-tube and pornhub
lowering the barrier of entry to gay
porn via the internet is believed by sex
educators to be one of the biggest
influences on the spike in homosexuality
and bisexuality
among the general population it's not
that there are suddenly more queer
people than ever before
but that it's easier for them to explore
their sexuality in a consequence-free
way
by 2004 there was more porn than ever
with countless professional and amateur
producers filling up the internet
niches that has long gone under served
suddenly had entire sites dedicated to
them
and quickly it became very obvious that
the most popular genre of gay porn was
the barely legal kind
a genre that was about to rock the
billion dollar industry to its very core
[Music]
at the end of the 20th century brian
coaches was an unemployed medical
photographer in dallas township
a small town in pennsylvania he was so
hard off that he'd had to declare
bankruptcy
coaches started cobra video in hopes of
hitting it big and to many people's
surprise
it worked he had a knack for finding
cute boys who would work for cheap
and appealing to the fans of barely
legal porn because of this
coach's company grew quickly with adult
video stores unable to keep his videos
in stock
coaches couldn't resist mixing business
with pleasure though only a few months
after getting into porn he almost
scuttled his new career
in the spring of 2001 coaches met a
young pennsylvania boy in an aol chat
room
who used the screen name superboy298
although the boy was only 15
coaches picked him up twice each time he
had sex with a boy including once on
camera
after promising him a job packaging
cobra videos for online orders the boy
eventually spilled the beans to his
parents
police and the fbi raided the house and
took away pornographic material
audio equipment and cameras initially
charged with several felonies including
the sexual assault of a boy who he had
videotaped
coaches was allowed to plead guilty to a
lesser charge when prosecutors realized
that the boy had lied about his age
with the exception of the sex tape
coaches made prosecutors were forced to
return
every item they had seized from him
including 600 porn videos
placed on probation for one year coaches
served no jail time
by 2004 he had left his run-in with the
law behind him
and had become one of the most
successful producers of gay pornography
in the world
he drove a bmw a maserati and an aston
martin
had a large house and more money than he
knew what to do with
all of this came from making videos of
his kennel of twins having sex
and no twink was more responsible for
paying for those cars
and that house than sean lockhart aka
brent corrigan coaches had discovered
lockhart online
he was a rare find a dead ringer for zac
efron with charisma and sex appeal to
spare
while lockhart was still a junior in
high school coaches made and distributed
films that featured the 17 year old
off the set he wielded obsessive control
over the teenager's life
desperate to know at all times where
lockhart was and who he was talking to
the dvds and downloads of lockhart's
quickly became the top sellers in the
industry
one film schoolboy crush was the most
downloaded gay video of 2004
but as lockhart's fan base expanded
coaches faced a problem
the young star wanted to strike out on
his own coaches was paying lockhart only
two thousand dollars per scene
about the industry standard at the time
for a handful of scenes each year
coaches by contrast reportedly cleared
two million dollars a year
lockhart was determined to work for
other studios though and so coaches sued
him for breach of contract
demanding one million dollars in damages
the teenager was backed into a corner
born in idaho on halloween in 1986
sean grew up in the seattle area his
mother who he described as an alcoholic
with a temper
left him with his stepfather and three
siblings when sean was in the third
grade
lockhart never knew his biological
father and never sought him out
my mother never wanted to tell me
anything about him he said
her flawed philosophy on parenting was
to give me the space i needed to live my
life
when sean was a junior in high school he
moved to san diego to live with his
mother in a shabby house
in a rough neighborhood he was
interested in film and the move enabled
him to establish state residency
so he could attend film school in
southern california being gay made him
unpopular
so he took refuge in the drama society
he also became a regular in hillcrest
san diego's wealthy gay enclave sexually
active at 16
he was soon fending off men left and
right it wasn't an easy time though
sean's brother called him [ __ ]
constantly and his stepfather another
alcoholic ran into trouble with the irs
growing up in my family it wasn't
encouraged to show a lot of love to each
other
i just remember a lot of hate fighting
and yelling
i don't recall ever having a positive
adult role model
at 16 he began spending his weekends in
los angeles with his new boyfriend
a 21 year old he called jake the two had
met online and jake became the first in
a series of older lovers eager to
exploit lockhart's looks
in 2003 jake and aspiring porn star
himself had applied for a job at cobra
video
the company owned by brian coaches he
was turned down
too old but sean who looked 12 was
exactly what cobra was looking for
considering how hand to mouth he and his
mother were living sean was willing to
give porn a try
in an online chat jake gushed about
lockhart to coaches
i have the hottest new boyfriend who is
17 he's about to turn 18
he wrote to prove it he slipped off
sean's shorts while he was sleeping
and turned on his webcam to give coaches
a live dose of lockhart
coaches was hooked sensing the massive
following lockhart would have
he contacted shawn almost every day
chatting online and on the phone for
hours
coaches sent lockhart a video camera
which sean used to film a casting tape
of himself masturbating
brian was good at talking at my level
lockhart says
he asked a lot of questions he wanted to
know about my family situation
and about how inattentive my mother was
he sort of took the place of my father
and i thought he was
looking out for my best interests
coaches had the kind of childhood that
lockhart could only dream of
as a boy brian rose to the rank of eagle
scout and won a nationwide photography
contest
if sean couldn't have an ideal childhood
he'd try his best
to have an ideal adulthood in february
of 2004 nine months before his 18th
birthday
sean began shooting movies for coaches
performing alone and with other models
under two contracts he signed with the
director lockhart was to receive an
unspecified amount for each action scene
he shot
in addition he would be given a 2002
volkswagen jetta
a set of four rims and tires insurance
premiums worth twenty one hundred
a cell phone plan and an unspecified
signing bonus
to a teenager living on the edge of
poverty this was significant money
lockhart chose a stage name brent
corrigan by flipping through a telephone
book on a shoot in florida
in an online column he wrote later for a
gay porn gossip site
sean said i could easily disappear for
four days for a shoot and
lie to my mother about where i was going
i was in it alone i
promised myself i would do the work to
get what i needed and then
turn my back on it i was still somewhat
ashamed
of my homosexuality let alone having
participated in gay porn
despite lockhart's misgivings brent
corrigan became a star
dvds featuring him sold briskly at sixty
dollars per copy
as did online downloads at eight cents a
minute he gained even more notoriety
when schoolboy crushed and three other
corrigan titles were pulled from store
shelves and internet sites after it
became clear that lockhart had been
underage during their production
it all started one day in august 2004 a
woman who lived next door to coaches
approached lockhart who was painting
brian's house
she demanded to know how old he was
denouncing coaches as a pedophile and
threatening to call the police
afraid he would be arrested lockhart
packed up his belongings and headed back
to san diego where his mother
was living with her latest boyfriend in
a one-bedroom apartment
sean moved in with them and graduated
from high school with few job prospects
no money for school
and working for a hundred dollars a week
shawn was at a dead end
then he met grant roy a well-off
trucking executive who was a fan of his
work
a relationship quickly developed between
the two and roy decided they needed to
wrestle control of brent corrigan's
brand away from brian coaches
they set up a website to promote
lockhart and formed a new porn company
coaches sued charging lockhart with
trademark infringement claiming to own
the branch oregon name
in a counter suit lockhart alleged the
coaches had engaged in fraudulent
business practices
which left him in emotional distress the
lawsuit created further difficulties for
lockhart who had left cobra to film the
velvet mafia with falcon studios who had
agreed to pay him ten thousand dollars
for two scenes
far above the industry standard but as
soon as legal threats arrived from
coaches falcon refused to build lockhart
as brent corrigan
calling him fox rider instead feeling
like they'd have to produce their own
videos
roy began looking for models online
where he came across a picture of a buff
jock type named harlow quadra a navy
veteran who made his living as a male
escort in the military
town of virginia beach quadro wanted to
move beyond escorting and make even
bigger money in online porn
a brent corrigan fan he struck up an
email correspondence with lockhart and
roy
which led to talk of forming a porn
partnership quadra and his boyfriend
joseph carakas
made plans to meet them on january 11th
at a gay porn trade show held in las
vegas
the two couples sat down for dinner at
lucerck in the bellagio and the
conversation immediately turned to
business
cuadra and caracas came on strong
wanting to strike a deal right away
they offered an obscene amount of money
to do you know a couple of scenes and i
just
was like this is ridiculous
whatever reservations lockhart and roy
had everyone at the table knew that
there was a major impediment to any deal
brian coaches as long as cobra had
lockhart tied up in court
the star could not film under the name
brent corrigan for both lockhart and
quadra their fame and future livelihoods
seemed to hang on a single middle-aged
man
back in pennsylvania so quadra made a
proposal that struck both lockhart and
roy as strange
what if brian left the country he asked
roy understood exactly what was being
suggested
we don't need coaches to leave the
country he said changing the subject
when dinner ended lockhart stumbled back
to his hotel room and passed out
neither he nor roy called the police
within days their lawsuit with brian
coaches was settled
brent corrigan was now a free agent
information that never made it to cuadra
and caracas
a day after the trade show ended
according to police quadra used his
discover card to run a 39.95 background
check on brian coaches
the check turned up his address on
midland drive two days later on january
22nd quadra created a new email account
the first message sent from it went to
cobra cobravideo.com
an account used by coaches the sender
introduced himself as
danny moylan and said would like to
model happy face
coaches invited him to come visit the
next evening as kochus was speaking on
the phone to his attorney in california
danny moylan arrived the director said
that he had to go
and he sounded on top of the world less
than two hours later coaches was dead
stabbed 28 times his throat had been
slashed
and his house set on fire he was only
identifiable by dental records
the next day quadra called lockhart go
to the wnep website quadra said
referring to the abc affiliate in nearby
scranton which was reporting
on the murder of brian coaches sean
changed the channel
dropped the phone and threw up it didn't
take long for police to zero in on
quadra
finding pictures of him on coaches hard
drive but they needed more than just
pictures and some chat history
meanwhile quadra and caracas were using
their newfound infamy as suspected
killers to improve their business
prospects
they promoted their startup film studio
on [ __ ] gossip sites that ferociously
debated the murder
cuadra and crackus also made it a point
to keep in touch with their potential
business partners
at 10 14 am on march 3rd grant roy
received an email
hey grant it's harlow so when we gonna
start filming
you know we had an agreement three
minutes later roy received
a more ominous message don't [ __ ] with
us
to cement their deal quadra and caracas
came to san diego for another meeting
by now however roy and lockhart were
cooperating with the police
they had come under intense suspicion
after coaches was killed and they wanted
to clear their names
so both agreed to wear a wire when they
met with quadra and caracas
on april 27th as a police helicopter
worried nearby
the foursome reunited over lunch at the
crab catcher restaurant in la hola
roy asked quadra if brian coaches had
felt any pain when he died
don't worry quadra said leaning over to
lockhart
he went quick the four men agreed to
meet again the following day at black's
beach
a clothing optional spot north of san
diego cuadra seemed to think that no
clothes would mean no wires
promising to tell lockhart and roy
everything when they were on the beach
nude apparently unaware of how small
recording devices had become
at the beach the talk eventually turned
to the day coaches was murdered
we were trying for you know some form of
confession but really
when it came down to it it was more they
knew
so much about what they'd done that that
was damning enough
on may 15th four months after the
killing harlow quadra and joseph carakas
were arrested in virginia beach and
charged with homicide
robbery and arson after lockhart
testified
both were found guilty and sentenced to
life in prison
without the possibility of parole
lockhart and roy eventually broke up
with sean going on to have an extensive
career in gay porn
as well as in some mainstream movies the
whole ordeal was made into a movie
starring james franco and former disney
star garrett clayton in 2016
though the accuracy of its portrayal is
questionable at best
since then sean has pulled back from the
spotlight preferring a more private life
he prefers to not talk about brian
coaches
or harlow quadra
within months of the brian coach's
murder and the porn world was rocked
with another gut punch
the streaming video software they had
helped to create in the late 90s
was coming back to haunt them the launch
of pornhub.com
inspired by the still young youtube
pornhub was a site designed to allow
aspiring porn performers and horny
imagers
to post videos online for the world to
see within weeks of the site's launch
people were already uploading videos
from sean cody corbin fisher falcon and
bellamy
it was a copyright nightmare the legal
fees of which could send many companies
into bankruptcy
but not only were people posting
copyrighted videos to the service
but studios now had to compete with free
porn available to anyone
charging 60 per video seemed absurd in a
world where people could find high
quality pornographic videos for free
with the click of a mouse
seancody.com became particularly
litigious
suing not only people who uploaded their
videos to sites like pornhub
but also attempting to sue anyone who
watched them pornhub tried to gain some
goodwill from the industry by taking
action and removing copyrighted content
but industry professionals didn't care
pornhub was breaking the business model
that had been in place since the days of
mail order loops
if you wanted to watch porn you paid for
it
some studios suggested pornhub allow
people to upload their amateur videos
but to require a paid subscription to
watch them
the question then became was it legal
for pornhub to make money from amateur
content
if not how would they pay the uploaders
how could they be sure people were
uploading original content and not
simply ripping amateur looking videos
from other sites
and uploading them as their own their
headache came to an end in 2010 when
pornhub was purchased by manwin
now known as mindgeek a canadian tech
company that had spent the last few
years buying up adult websites across
the net
the montreal-based company specialized
in online advertising
and was optimizing their streaming video
sites to feature ads for adult products
and any company secure enough to have
their brand associated with porn
traditional studios like falcon began
buying ad space on mind geek owned
websites
creating an uneasy partnership between
enemies but
things were about to get a lot more
uneasy over the next decade mind geek
would become a monolith in the porn
world
as of 2020 they owned pornhub porn md
redtube uporn browsers digital
playground men.com
sean cody and countless other formerly
independent porn producers and providers
they even own a steak and playboy
vertically integrating their streaming
and production businesses by advertising
professional productions from men.com
sean cody and browsers on amateur videos
on their tube sites
eventually uploading entire videos from
their production arm to act as a tease
for everything available behind the
paywall
many in the industry today both in the
straight and gay worlds accuse mind geek
of holding a monopoly over the industry
while others claim mind geeks simply saw
the future coming and prepared for it
before anyone else
today mindgeek is the third top consumer
of internet bandwidth in the entire
world
behind only google and facebook with 115
million daily users they dwarf youtube's
average of 30 million daily users
it's also estimated that mindgeek has
the world's third largest pool of
monetized user data with only facebook
and amazon beating them out
with offices in montreal dublin london
hamburg bucharest la miami and san diego
they are by far the most far-reaching
porn provider and producer on earth
they've swallowed up many of their
competitors though you wouldn't know it
they buy studios with an area press
release and keep them running
advertising their content on their tube
sites and paying themselves for the ad
space
as mind geek buys up production
companies their website's monthly
membership costs drop
since mindgeek makes most of its revenue
from advertising and big data
which puts pressure on other producers
to lower their own monthly membership
fees
a trend that has led many companies to
slash how much performers are paid
in order to remain profitable this is
all that killed the decades-old studio
system in the porn world
in which a performer will sign an
exclusivity contract with a studio
those contracts are now exceedingly rare
except
with studios owned by mind geek to make
up for the lost income many performers
have turned to independent production
and distribution
with websites like only fans just for
fans and even patreon popping up to
allow individual models to charge a
monthly fee for self-produced content
another nail in the coffin of
independent studios mind geek doesn't
mind though
since most of the performers will upload
preview videos to pornhub accounts to
help advertise their only fans pages and
even though mind geek owns much of the
porn world at this point
it's very likely you've never heard of
them they stay under the radar on
purpose
and their own website is so vague you
wouldn't take them for anything but
another generic tech firm
even their headquarters situated not far
from downtown montreal
is almost camouflaged made entirely of
reflective glass it blends in almost
seamlessly with the sky above
mind geek's secret monopoly has changed
the world of porn for good
studios now run on a quantity over
quality basis constantly fighting to
make sure they have
enough content to keep subscribers happy
and paying
unlike the mainstream film industry's
disastrous response to netflix
porn studios have adapted quickly helix
studios for instance has become well
known for producing videos that are
closer in quality to high-end
independent films
than the overly lit multi-camera soap
opera looking videos from
shawncodeyanmen.com
and they're not alone cocky boys is
another studio aiming for a more
cinematic quality to their porn
hearkening back to the days of when
pornographers looked at adult movies as
sexy films with a lot of sex instead of
just sex
[Music]
it's interesting to see porn evolve in
recent years
as companies fight to distinguish
themselves from mind geek's monolith
fans of the videos are seeing nothing
but benefits
for people who want high quality erotic
films helix and cocky boys have got you
covered
for people who want just the sex mind
geek's collection of studios like shawn
cody are there to provide
for those who want more real of the
moment porn there are thousands of
onlyfans accounts ready for your monthly
subscription
[ __ ] has changed a lot over the last
70 years
from the photos of bob miser to the
films of tom de simone and wakefield
pool
to the creation of studios like falcon
and catalina
through the aids crisis and thousands of
lost lives
the creation of the internet
unprecedented growth violent murder the
rise of a monopoly
and now the democratization of the
industry
gay porn helped to create the home video
market helped push vhs to a win over
betamax
and developed the very technology being
used to stream this video today
the story of gay porn in the 20th and
21st century is a lot like that of gay
people ourselves
hidden in the closet like so many bob
miser photos
sparking a revolution to be acknowledged
fighting through a plague no one wanted
to see us get through
and finally now to some kind of
acceptance in the mainstream
though many would be loathed to admit it
[ __ ] has helped to shape what it
means to be gay
it was a rare look at gay sexuality when
we were nothing but villains and jokes
in hollywood films
a place to feel accepted when straight
couples lined around the block to see
the boys in the sand
a fantasy refuge from the aids crisis
when being gay
could be a viral death sentence a
digital space to feel accepted in
when the bush administration fought to
enshrine gay discrimination into the
constitution
a place to see ourselves as desirable
when people call us freaks
it says something about our society that
porn was at its most popular its most
mainstream
50 years ago with the boys in the sand
and deep throat being bigger hits than
anything hollywood put out
what happened why did porn go back in
the closet
the conservative tsunami that hit north
america in the 1980s certainly did its
part
but have we not progressed since then
gay men and women fought
and won the right to get married and
serve in the military
two of the most conservative
institutions on earth
and yet many gay men won't admit that
they watch porn
in a 2019 poll 66 percent of gay men
said they were embarrassed to talk about
porn with friends they were afraid
people would think they were perverts
while 50 years ago we stood in line to
see porn in a movie theater
porn isn't about to have a theater
resurgence not when hollywood itself is
going more and more digital
but i believe we need to open our minds
and stop being ashamed of who we are and
what we watch
we fought for decades to not have to
hide in a closet
and yet we keep our porn hidden we
fought to not be ashamed to our families
to not be shamed by the population at
large for loving who we love
and here we are two decades into the new
millennium
we can get married serve in the military
run giant corporations run for president
and yet we're still ashamed not ashamed
of being gay
but ashamed of gay sex i think
it's time we stop being ashamed
[Music]
you